Here, I'd like to discuss some other interesting, related topics in Social Choice Theory that manifest in the Australian System. This will hopefully emphasise the relevance of Social Choice Theory and also drive home the more philosophical argument about expressiveness vs trade-offs.

Firstly, I want to discuss the assumption of voter's preferences respecting left-right alignment. Not only is that not true for every voter, but some voters stand to gain by voting against their *honest preferences*. For example, in Australia, voters who most prefer one major party may preference the other major party last (i.e., below fringe candidates). This is done in order to prevent the less desired major party from securing a majority *too early* in the instant run-off voting process. In Social Choice Theory, this is called **Strategic Voting**, and has been common in Australia at various times (see [Footnote 1](#footnote-1)). An well-known Arrovian result for strategic voting is the Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem.

Secondly, on a more positive note, when Strategic Voting is low, the Australian System typically satisfies **Monotonicity**, meaning "a candidate always benefits from receiving more votes". This is because a candidate receiving more votes typically further increases the ballots they receive from preference flows via closely aligned candidates, i.e., ballots that likely preferences them soon after. In other words, a candidate receiving more votes tends towards eliminating closely aligned candidates earlier, which causes their ballots to flow sooner.

Monotonicity can't be taken for granted in the best of times. For example, it does not hold in the French national system, which holds up to two "choose-one" elections, where the second is held between the final two in the event of a majority not being reached in the first round. Monotonicity does not hold in this system because if a candidate cannot attain a majority in the first round, they best ensure their second round opponent is one they can actually defeat head-to-head. Thus, if a candidate receives too many votes, that may prevent all defeatable candidates from appearing in the second round.

Finally, a fascinating result from Social Choice Theory that reiterates the value of all these chaotic edge-cases and trade-offs is **May's Theorem**, which states that **the only monotone voting method where all voters and all candidates are interchangeable is two-party majority voting.** Thus, to have the expressiveness of multi-candidate and preferential voting, one must learn to embrace the trade-offs.